=head1 NAME

librouteros - Library for accessing MikroTik's RouterOS via its API

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<librouteros> is a library to communicate with I<RouterOS>, the operating
system of I<MikroTik's> I<RouterBoards>. It uses the "API port" provided by
those systems to connect and talk to the devices. librouteros is a low-level
library in that it abstracts the network protocol used but has next to no
knowledge about the commands and responses available. Should such an high-level
interface prove useful, it will be added as the need arises.

=head1 GENERAL USAGE

The interface of librouteros is designed to be lightweight and simple to use.
The first thing when using the library is to create a connection object. Once a
connection has been established and logging in succeeded, queries can be sent
to the remote device. The library will encode and send the request, read back a
reply, decode it and pass it to a callback function. The callback function has
access to the parsed reply and can easily access all parts and parameters. It
does not need to worry about memory management because everything provided to
it will be freed by the library before returning to where the query was called
from. When the application is done talking to the device and disconnects, the
connection object will be freed.

=head1 INTERFACES

=head2 Connection

The connection to a I<RouterOS> device is represented by a pointer to a
B<ros_connection_t> type. This is an opaque data type which cannot be
dereferenced or manipulated directly.

Connection management is done with the following functions:

=over 4

=item ros_connection_t *B<ros_connect> (const char *I<node>, const char *I<service>, const char *I<username>, const char *I<password>)

Connects to the remote device using I<node> as the address or hostname. If
I<service> is C<NULL>, the standard port B<8728> will be used. When a
connection has been established, the library will try to authenticate using
I<username> and I<password>.

On failure, C<NULL> is returned and B<errno> is set appropriately.

=item int B<ros_disconnect> (ros_connection_t *I<c>)

Disconnects from the device and frees all memory associated with the
connection. After this call, I<c> may not be used anymore.

Returns zero upon success and an error code otherwise.

=back

=head2 General / low level queries

This interface abstracts the network protocol only and leaves actually
formulating queries and interpreting replies to the calling code. This is meant
for queries and features for which no higher level interface exists.

The query is sent to the daemon using the B<ros_query> function. The reply is
decoded and passed to a callback function with the following prototype, also
called B<ros_reply_handler_t>:

  int callback (ros_connection_t *c, const ros_reply_t *r, void *user_data);

The reply is broken into parts (or "sentences") and passed to the callback
function as a linked list of type B<ros_reply_t>. It is only called once for
query and must traverse the linked list itself. The callback uses a couple of
helper functions to iterate over this list and fetch parameters as necessary.

The first and second arguments are objects representing the connection and the
reply respectively. I<user_data> is a pointer as passed to B<ros_query> (see
below). The arguments I<c> and I<r> may not be modified or freed. They will be
freed after the function returns, so pointers to this data are invalid after
this.

The value returned by the callback function will be returned by B<ros_query> to
the calling code. To distinguish from error codes returned by B<ros_query> upon
errors, use negative values in the callback function.

Because the entire reply is read back from the connection before the callback
function is called, it is legal for the callback function to send out another
query.

General queries / replies are handled using the following functions:

=over 4

=item int B<ros_query> (ros_connection_t *I<c>, const char *I<command>, size_t I<args_num>, const char * const *I<args>, ros_reply_handler_t I<handler>, void *I<user_data>)

Sends the command I<command> with the I<args_num> arguments I<args> via the
connection I<c> and reads back the reply. The reply is parsed and passed to the
callback function I<handler>. I<user_data> is a pointer passed through to the
callback function. Please note that the callback function is called only once,
even if the reply consists of multiple parts. Use the B<ros_reply_next>
function (see below) to access the other parts.

Returns the value returned by the callback function upon success and an error
code otherwise.

=item const ros_reply_t *B<ros_reply_next> (const ros_reply_t *I<r>)

Each reply can consist of several parts or "sentences". If there is more than
one sentence returned by the device, this function will return the next part.
When the end of the list is reached, C<NULL> is returned.

=item int B<ros_reply_num> (const ros_reply_t *I<r>)

Returns the number of replies in the list pointed to by and including I<r>.

=item const char *B<ros_reply_status> (const ros_reply_t *I<r>)

Returns the status message of this part or reply. This is usually "re" for data
parts, "done" for the last part in a reply and "trap" for errors.
The returned pointer must not be freed.

=item const char *B<ros_reply_param_key_by_index> (const ros_reply_t *I<r>, unsigned int I<index>)

Returns the parameter key at index I<index> (starting with zero) of reply I<r>.
If I<index> is out of bounds, returns C<NULL>.
The returned pointer must not be freed.

=item const char *B<ros_reply_param_val_by_index> (const ros_reply_t *I<r>, unsigned int I<index>)

Returns the parameter value at index I<index> (starting with zero) of reply
I<r>. If I<index> is out of bounds, returns C<NULL>.
The returned pointer must not be freed.

=item const char *B<ros_reply_param_val_by_key> (const ros_reply_t *I<r>, const char *I<key>)

Returns the parameter value corresponding to key I<key> (or C<NULL> if there is
no such key) of reply I<r>.
The returned pointer must not be freed.

=back

=head2 High level interface functions for "interface"

This function and the associated struct provide basic information about the
device's interfaces in an easy and intuitive to use form. It is equivalent to
issuing the C</interface/print> command. As with the generic interface above, a
query function is called with a pointer to a callback function. That callback
function is then called with a list of B<ros_interface_t> structures.

The query function has the following prototype:

 int ros_interface (ros_connection_t *c,
     ros_interface_handler_t handler, void *user_data);

I<c> is a pointer to a connection object as returned by B<ros_connect>.

I<handler> is a function pointer to a callback function handling the result.
The callback function must have the following prototype, called
B<ros_interface_handler_t> for convenience:

 int callback (ros_connection_t *c,
     const ros_interface_t *i, void *user_data);

The argument I<i> is a pointer to the first element of the list of interfaces
received from the device. This struct is defined in E<lt>routeros_api.hE<gt>
and contains information such as the name of the device, received and
transmitted bytes and whether or not the interface is currently running. No
element of the list nor any of their members may be modified and will be freed
when the callback returns.

=head2 High level interface functions for "registration-table"

This high level interface makes it easy to access the "registration table",
which holds active wireless lan connections. The data returned is equivalent to
running C</interface/wireless/registration-table/print>. The parsed data is
passed to a callback function in form of a B<ros_registration_table_t>
structure.

The query function has the following prototype:

 int ros_registration_table (ros_connection_t *c,
     ros_registration_table_handler_t handler, void *user_data);

I<c> is the usual connection ocject. I<handler> is a pointer to a function with
the following prototype:

 int callback (ros_connection_t *c,
     const ros_registration_table_t *r, void *user_data);

The usual semantics apply: You may not alter I<r> and the memory pointed to by
I<r> is freed after the callback returned.

=head2 High level interface functions for "system resource"

This high level interface makes it easy to access several system related
metrics, such as memory and disk space used. The data returned is equivalent to
running C</system/resource/print>. The parsed data is passed to a callback
function in form of a B<ros_system_resource_t> structure.

The query function has the following prototype:

 int ros_system_resource (ros_connection_t *c,
     ros_system_resource_handler_t handler, void *user_data);

I<c> is the usual connection ocject. I<handler> is a pointer to a function with
the following prototype:

 int callback (ros_connection_t *c,
     const ros_system_resource_t *r, void *user_data);

The usual semantics apply: You may not alter I<r> and the memory pointed to by
I<r> is freed after the callback returned.

=head2 Versioning

The I<routeros> library contains version information that can be used at
compile time as well as at runtime.

At B<compile time>, the version is available in form of two preprocessor
defines, C<ROS_VERSION> and C<ROS_VERSION_STRING>. C<ROS_VERSION> is a numeric
value where the major version is multiplied by 10000 and the minor version is
multiplied by 100. Version I<1.2.3> would therefore be returned as I<10203>.
C<ROS_VERSION_STRING> is defined to be a string, for example I<"1.2.3"> and can
be used for printing a pretty version information.

The same information is available at B<run time> using two functions which
return the information. The function C<ros_version> returns the numeric value
of C<ROS_VERSION> and C<ros_version_string> returns the value of
C<ROS_VERSION_STRING>, making it possible to check the version of the actually
used library.

=head1 ERROR HANDLING

Some of the functions above return an "error code". This error code can be
transferred to a string describing the error using L<strerror(3)> or
L<strerror_r(3)>. Since the error codes are all positive integers, it is
recommended to use negative return values in the callback functions to indicate
custom errors if appropriate.

=head1 THREAD SAFETY

librouteros uses only thread-safe functions and does not store any global data
itself. It is therefore fully thread and reentrant safe as long as you don't
call any functions with the same connection object.

=head1 LICENSE

librouteros is licensed under the GPLv2. No other version of the license is
applicable.

=head1 AUTHOR

librouteros is written by Florian octo Forster E<lt>octo at verplant.orgE<gt>.
Its homepage can be found at L<http://verplant.org/librouteros/>.

(c) 2009 by Florian octo Forster.
