=head1 NAME

ros - Command line utility to list information from RouterOS devices

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  ros [options] <host> <command> [arguments]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<ros> is a command line utility which uses I<librouteros> to connect to a
device running RouterOS and issue a command on the device. The result is
received and displayed on standard output. The tool was initially written as a
simple test application for librouteros but may evolve into something usable.

=head1 OPTIONS

The following options are understood:

=over 4

=item B<-u> I<username>

Use I<username> when authenticating rather than "admin", the default.

=item B<-h>

Display some usage information and exit.

=back

=head1 COMMANDS

You can use one of two possibilities to issue commands. I<Generic commands>
start with a slash and follow the low-level syntax closely. For example:

  ros router.example.com '/ip/address/print'

Besides this generic approach, I<ros> can also handle the high-level interfaces
provided by librouteros. Currently the following special "built-in" commands
are available:

=over 4

=item B<interface>

Display information about each interface, including byte counters.

=item B<registration-table>

Display information about current wireless connections.

=item B<system-resource>

Display generic system information, such as memory used and CPU load.

=back

=head1 LICENSE

I<ros> is licensed under the GPLv2. No other version of the license is applicable.

=head1 AUTHOR

I<ros> is written by Florian octo Forster E<lt>octo at verplant.orgE<gt>.
Its homepage can be found at L<http://verplant.org/librouteros/>.

(c) 2009 by Florian octo Forster.
